---
title: javaScript and pure functions
date: 2020-06-18 16:13:00
tags: [js]
layout: post
categories: js
id: 669
updated: 2020-10-09 10:35:56
version: 1.13
---

So in javaScript there are many different [kinds of functions](/2019/12/16/js-function/) such as function expressions, declarations, and arrow functions. However there is also many different ways how functions can be used, inside the body of a function it is possible from me to change the value of something that is outside of the functions scope, it is also possible to write functions where I do everything I can to avoid doing something like that. There is creating a local variable inside the body of a function that has a value that is generated by something like the Math.random method, and then there is making that local variable an argument of the function that can have a value created by Math.random, or a fixed set value.

There is the nature of [constructor functions](/2019/02/27/js-javascript-constructor/) and how they are used as a way to create functions that are called off of an instance of that constructor by way of a prototype object. In contrast to that of a constructor function there is what many might call a [pure function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pure_function), or at least a pure like function if I can call it that, which might be a function that has at least some of the features of a pure function. In pure functions one of the features is that a pure function will always return the same result for the same arguments, this is not always the case when calling the prototype method of a constructor instance as the value can change from one call to the next with the same arguments depending on the value of the state.

With the instances of constructor functions there are prototype methods like that of the array splice method for example that will mutate an array in place, and then there are other methods in the array prototype such as slice that will not mutate the source array, but instead return a new array without mutating the source array off of while array slice was called. However even with array slice it can still end up giving different results depending on the state of the array that is is called off of, so although it is maybe a pure like function it is not a true pure function going by a strict definition of what one is.

So in this post I will be going over some pure functions, or at least functions that demonstrate some of the features of pure functions. I would say that using pure functions helps to keep things a little more organized, easy to read, and debug, but it is not enough for me to just say that. It would be best to see for ones self, not just by reading content such as this, but by taking the time to work out ones own pure function examples. Still it is nice to have some kind of guide as a starting point so lets get to it.

<!-- more -->

## 1 - Basic examples of a pure and not so pure function

So a pure function is a function where the return value is always the same for the same given arguments, and also there are no side effects when calling the pure function. So When calling the function no global variables or state object is mutated. Only a new return value is returned and then it is a question as to what is done with that return value.

So say I have two distance formula methods one of which makes use of some global variables, and one that just works with what is passed via arguments.

```js
// some globals
var x = 0,
y = 0;
// a function that makes use of the globals and some arguments
var dist = function (x2, y2) {
    return Math.sqrt(Math.pow(x - x2, 2) + Math.pow(y - y2, 2));
};
 
// a function that just makes use of arguments and only arguments
// no use of globals or the this keyword
var distance = function (x1, y1, x2, y2) {
    return Math.sqrt(Math.pow(x1 - x2, 2) + Math.pow(y1 - y2, 2));
};
 
console.log(dist(100, 100)); // 141.4213562373095
console.log(distance(0, 0, 100, 100)); // 141.4213562373095
 
x = -15;
y = -32;
 
// a pure function will always give the same result with the same arguments
console.log(dist(100, 100)); // 175.06855799943062
console.log(distance(0, 0, 100, 100)); // 141.4213562373095
```

## 2 - A box Class and a pure function alternative way of doing the same thing

In this section I will be going over a simple Box constructor function that has a single distance prototype method, and a pure function style alternative that does the same thing without the use of a constructor.

### 2.1 - The Box Class

So lets say I have a Box Class that looks like this.

```js
var Box = function (opt) {
    opt = opt || {};
    this.x = opt.x === undefined ? 0 : opt.x;
    this.y = opt.y === undefined ? 0 : opt.y;
    this.w = opt.w === undefined ? 32 : opt.w;
    this.h = opt.h === undefined ? 32 : opt.h;
};
 
Box.prototype.distance = function (bx) {
    var x1 = this.x + this.w / 2,
    y1 = this.y + this.h / 2,
    x2 = bx.x + bx.w / 2,
    y2 = bx.y + bx.h / 2,
    d = Math.sqrt(Math.pow(x1 - x2, 2) + Math.pow(y1 - y2, 2));
    return Math.floor(d);
};
 
var bx1 = new Box({
        x: 0,
        y: 0
    });
 
var bx2 = new Box({
        x: 100,
        y: 50
    });
 
// calling the distance prototype method off of the
// bx1 instance, and passing bx2 as the first argument
console.log(bx1.distance(bx2)); // 111
 
// the state of bx1 is changed
bx1.x = -15;
bx1.y = -24;
 
// now calling the distance prototype method
// results in a different value even though the same argument
// is passed and it did not change.
console.log(bx1.distance(bx2)); // 136
 
// one way to resolve this might be to use call to make it more
// pure function like, but it still might be best to just make distance
// a stand alone function.
console.log( Box.prototype.distance.call(bx1, bx2) ); // 136
```

### 2.2 - Some pure functions that can also be used to do the same

So in place of using a constructor function to create a Box Class instance why not just have a pure function that will always return the same box object for the same arguments, and in addition it returns just a plain old object? I can then use the plain old object that has box properties with a stand alone distance formula that is also very much pure function like.

```js
var createBox = function (opt) {
    opt = opt || {};
    return {
        x: opt.x === undefined ? 0 : opt.x,
        y: opt.y === undefined ? 0 : opt.y,
        w: opt.w === undefined ? 32 : opt.w,
        h: opt.h === undefined ? 32 : opt.h
    };
};
 
var distance = function (x1, y1, x2, y2) {
    return Math.sqrt(Math.pow(x1 - x2, 2) + Math.pow(y1 - y2, 2));
};
 
var bx = createBox({
        x: 100,
        y: 50
    });
 
console.log( distance(0, 0, bx.x, bx.y) ); // 111.80339887498948
```

As of late I find myself ditching the use of constructors in favor of writing modules like this.

## 3 - Conclusion

So pure functions are generally a better way of going about doing things I would say over all. I do not think that I would care to always try to make everything in a project fully functional by trying to make everything a pure function though. To at least some extent it might not always be possible to make all functions a pure function in a project anyway, but still I think they help to keep things a little more sane.